Tim Berners-Lee

Date started: December 19, 1997

Status: personal view. Editing status: As good as it will get for a while..

[Up to Design Issues](https://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/Overview.html)

###  Philosophy of the Web - Filtering and Censorship

* * *

#  Filtering and Censorship_  
_

Information is powerful stuff.  The world has been enthralled by the power
which the Web, the universe of accessible information, gives to people and to
groups working and playing together.

Information about information is powerful not just as information, but because
it allows one to leverage one's use of information, to benefit from that which
is relevant, accurate, stylish, unbiased, or timely, -- whatever one regards
as being of "quality" -- without being enmired in that which is not.

Powerful tools are often usable for constructive or destructive purposes just
as paper and ink be used for truth or lies, and metal for ploughshares or
swords. The Web's power stems from its universality - for example that a
hypertext link an point to any information out there, not just a subset.
People have asked whether I regret that the Web has been used for some uses,
but I have to reply that if somehow it had been built to control the material
which was placed in it, then that would be the technology controlling society,
rather than the other way around as it should be.

True, one could take the view that our society is not strong enough to be
trusted with a powerful information system.  One could take the view that
society does not currently have the wherewithal to prevent the Web from being
abused by destructive forces to an extent that the overall pain is greater
than the gain.  I do not believe this is true. In the western developed world,
at least, I believe that the democratic process will have sufficient control
over governments and the judicial process sufficient control of criminals, to
continue to defend the health of the evolving society.

We should be very careful, by constant inspection, to ensure that this
continues to be the case.

###  Filtering and Censorship

One of the threats which posed itself in 1994 was of government censorship
over information on the Web.  In general, there are information acts which
societies regard as legal, and those which are illegal (such as fraud).  The
problem which arose was that in the very subjective question of what
information is deemed suitable for children, there was a threat that, in order
to "protect" children, seeing no other alternative, governments were
contemplating making draconian legislation for example prohibiting the
transmission of "indecent" material. The problems here were many.

First of all, the concept of "indecent" was being enforced as a central single
concept, quite against the distributed subjective nature of its definition in
society.  The Web works as a decentralized system, with no hierarchical or
other structure to force society into a shape imposed by technology.  This
works.  Centralization of such an idea would [prevent the Web from being an
accurate mirror of society itself.

Secondly, the problem being solved was the reading of such information by
children, not its transmission. Thirdly, the question of "transmission" seemed
to include intermediate parties who were not responsible for the content in an
editorial or authorship sense. And one could list other problems, but this is
enough for the present.

###  Information Quality

The basic problem being addressed was that of subjective information
"quality".  This is the same problem reported by newcomers to teh web who find
(typically after a search engine search) too much "junk".

It is unreasonable to ask for information delivered from the web to be of
consistently high "quality" if you can't define what "quality" is.  There is a
need, then, to be able to represent "quality" in a completely subjective way.

This is what the PICS project was all about.  PICS was specifically aimed at
demonstrating that individuals could obtain their own subjective notion of
quality without the government having to try to "protect" them by enforcing
some centralized notion.  Politically, PICS is a system necessary for the
preservation of free speech on the Internet.

The system needed a few different sorts of documents

a "rating system"

     which defines a scale or scales on which one might judge a document.  The fact that anyone can create one of these is a strong force allowing decentralization of concept, breaking the problem of the global, centralized definition of for example "indecency".  PICS allows communities of any size (from one up) to establish their own criteria.  Agreement over a large community enhances global harmony, but threatens diversity. Agreement over a small community does the reverse. So in fact some balance is necessary 
a "label"

     which is a statement about something in terms of the schema.  This can be made by any party, not just author or reader, and certainly not just central government.  These can be created and exchanged in all manner of ways, so the PICS standard for interoperability is essential. 
A "profile"

     which describes for a given person the particular rating systems and levels on those scales which represent "quality" information at a given time and in a given context.  This sort of information can either be input by a person using a graphic interface (such as a set of sliders in a dialog box), or can simply be transferred from someone they trust, whether family, organization, or friend. Inability to transfer this would prevent people from building their own communities with common standards of trust: hence the importance for this (picsrules) as a standard. 

These are all subsets of a general metadata language, designed to be easy for
people to use.   In particular, by being limited in their power, they allow
graphic interfaces to be built.

###  On social responsibility of technologists

The argument has been made that PICS technology should be suppressed as the
power it gives may be abused by governments.  (There are even those who have
suggested that the whole scheme is a government inspired plot to promote
censorship and limit free speech.  This is certainly not the case, as neither
in the idea,  the funding nor the intent.)  Whereas most readers may find this
far fetched, it is worth a response on principle.

As I pointed out when closing the first International World Wide Web
conference, speaking to (then a mere 350) geeky web enthusiasts, I firmly
believe it is the task of scientists and technologists to be aware of and
responsible for the social implications of their work.  This cannot just be
left to "professional socially responsible people", as each engineer and
scientist is often  best aware of the potential of the work.  Uttered in the
auditorium at CERN, whose particle physicists trace their roots through
nuclear physics, I don't think the message went unheard, even though it may
have sounded strange in such a new field.  Now, (1997) the World Wide Web
Consortium has one of its three domains dedicated to the relationship between
Technology and Society.

###  So what about PICS?

The question basically is whether the potential danger of the technology
outweighs the freedom and positive good it accords.  You can certainly argue
this for nuclear fission, and you can certainly argue it for the wide
distribution of firearms in populous countries. Can you argue this for PICS
and metadata?  Is there anything about PICS specifically or metadata in
general which makes it more of a danger than a boon?

The specific types of document in PICS are very general. As a system, it is
quite generalist, and extremely decentralized.  It does as good a job as it
can of leaving policy up to others to set, although it does (compared with
other systems one could imagine) tend to favor by its nature cultural
diversity, and freedom of speech, including freedom to endorse other's work.

 The specifications of communication protocols enable, but do not enforce,
what manufactured software will or will not be able to do.  One cannot,
therefore, at this level say what individuals will be able to do.  The
technology can leave the policy up to others, which leaves other groups to
ensure that the values which they hold dear are not lost in new legislation,
industry practices, or public apathy.

A metainformation system allows one to talk about information. It enables all
kinds of uses of information

  * finding information 
  * talking about information 
  * making laws about information 
  * breaking laws about information 

It is not the place of a technical metadata system to try to limit the
statements one can make with metadata, or the laws if any which are made.
That is the role of the democratic process and whatever government the people
trusts. The W3C as an industry consortium can act for industry in promoting
standards, but cannot act to create laws.  What we can do is explain to
lawmakers and others the effect and intention of technology.  That is what
this article attempts to do.

####  Conclusion

So Metadata, PICS and otherwise, is powerful, as is information in general.
Constant vigilance by concerned members of the public, industry and government
is a very important part of the system of controls which keeps society
healthy.  The PICS technology was created specifically in order reduce the
risk of government censorship in civilized countries. It was the result of
members of the industrial community being concerned about the behaviour of
government. The indications are that in this it will succeed,  but that does
not remove the need for such vigilance.  

To conclude, out of fear or ignorance, that PICS is more of a danger than it
is a boon would be throw the baby out with the bathwater.  Metadata is not
just a new tool, it is the start of a machine-understandable web (a "web phase
2") of information whose impact should be as empowering  to humanity as the
human-understandable web of today.  We must understand it as we build it.

* * *

Tim BL,  December 1997

Last edit $Date: 2009/08/27 21:38:07 $

