Tim Berners-Lee

Date: April 1997

Status: personal view only. Editing status: not perfect.

[Up to Design Issues](https://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/Overview.html)

###  Axioms of Web Architecture

* * *

#  Links and Law: Myths

See [Links and Law](https://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkLaw) before reading this.

* * *

###  Myth one

###

Myth: "A normal link is an incitement to copy the linked document in a way
which infringes copyright".

This is a serious misunderstanding. The ability to refer to a document (or a
person or any thing else) is in general a fundamental right of free speech to
the same extent that speech is free. Making the reference with a hypertext
link is more efficient but changes nothing else.

When the "speech" itself is illegal, whether or not it contains hypertext
links, then its illegality should not be affected by the fact that it is in
electronic form.

Users and information providers and lawyers have to share this convention. If
they do not, people will be frightened to make links for fear of legal
implications. I received a mail message asking for "permission" to link to our
site. I refused as I insisted that permission was not needed.

**There is no reason to have to ask before making a link to another site**  
---  
  
But by the same token,

You are responsible for what you say about other people, and their sites,
etc., on the web as anywhere  
---  
  
###  Myth Two

Myth: Making a link to a document makes your document more valuable and
therefore is a right you should pay".

This is another dangerous one. It is of course true that your document is made
more valuable by links to high quality relevant other documents. A review in a
consumer magazine has added value because of the quality of the products to
which it refers the reader. I may be more valuable to you as a person if I
refer you to other people by name, phone number or URL. This doesn't mean I
owe those people something.

We cannot regard anyone as having the "right not to be referred to" without
completely pulling the rug out from under free speech.  
---  
  
###  Myth three

Myth: Making a link to someone's publicly readable document is an infringement
of privacy.

The "security by obscurity" method of hiding things behind secret URLs has the
property that anyone knowing the URL (like a password) can pass it on. This is
only a breach of confidentiality of there is some confidentiality agreement
which as been made.

###  Hall of Flame

Famous cases in which people tried to prevent others linking to their web
pages include, if I recall correctly, Ticketmaster trying to stop the Seattle
Sidewalk site linking into its pages, so that those looking through the site
about the town could follow a link and buy tickets to the events. This was
widely perceived not only as philosophically wrong by falling for the myths
above, but also crazy, as it was a protest against Seattle Sidewalk bring
traffic and hence business to the Ticketmaster site.

In 2002, A Danish court made an injunction preventing a Danish news filtering
service (effectively a sort of search engine) from linking to pages of a
Danish newspaper. See the slashdot article. I assume that the appeals process
will clear up this after this time of writing (2002/07). If such decisions are
accepted, the whole working of the web would break down.

In 2004, a [ comment](http://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/www-
tag/2004Aug/0029.html) to the W3C TAG noted that the [Athems Olympic
site](http://www.athens2004.com/athens2004/), no less, tried to prevent deep
linking, to pages such as their [sports
page](http://www.athens2004.com/en/Sports/indexpage). Thus, a vast set of
rather unique resources were supposed to be not really part of the web. They
even try to constrain how one will link to entry page. The Athens site
violates the principles above and sets a very bad example. A pity, when the
Olympics celebrate what is best in humanity, that the web presence should
exclude itself from the global discourse.

In 2010, according to the [New York
Times](http://www.nytimes.com/2010/04/09/technology/09paper.html), the Nikkei
Shimbun's website decided it could disallow linking, even to its home page.
"Links to [Nikkei's home page](http://e.nikkei.com/e/fr/freetop.aspx) require
a detailed written application. Among other things, applicants must spell out
their reasons for linking to the site. In addition, regular readers of the
site will also notice that the paper has disabled the ability to right-click
-- which usually brings up a menu including "copy link address." The paper's
"link policy" ends on an ominous note: "We may seek damages for any violations
of these rules." The Nikkei says the rules are intended to make sure its pay
wall is not breached and to prevent the linking of its content from
"inappropriate" sites.

###  Conclusions about links

There are some fundamental principles about links on which the Web is based.
These are principles allow the world of distributed hypertext to work.
Lawyers, users and technology and content providers must all agree to respect
these principles which have been outlined.

It is difficult to emphasize how important these issues are for society. The
first amendment to the Constitution of the United States, for example,
addresses the right to speak. The right to make reference to something is
inherent in that right. On the web, to make reference without making a link is
possible but ineffective - like speaking but with a paper bag over your head.

* * *

_A reminder this this is personal opinion, not related to W3C or MIT policy. I
reserve the right to rephrase this if misunderstandings occur, as its always
difficult to express this sort of thing to a mixed and varied audience._

* * *

[Next: Metadata architecture](https://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/Metadata.html)

[Up to Design Issues](https://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/Overview.html)

Tim BL

