* * *

[Design Issues](https://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/Overview.html)

#  Preface

##  Architectural and philosophical points

> _These statements of architectural principle explain the thinking behind the
specifications. These are personal notes by Tim Berners-Lee: they are not
endorsed by W3C. They are aimed at the technical community, to explain
reasons, provide a framework to provide consistency for for future
developments, and avoid repetition of discussions once resolved._

I have found that, having started this set of notes in 1990 in the (for me)
novel medium of hypertext, it has been difficult to tear free of it: my
attempts to lend hierachical or serial order have been doomed to failure.
Further, as ideas and these web pages have evolved, it has been important for
me to be able to reorganize my thoughts, grab a new leaf, shake the tree and
regard it as the root. So the reader needs to be aware of this, that each page
may be an attempt to put across a given concept serially, but if you are
looking for an order of concepts and subconcepts, you have as much hope as you
would with words in the dictionary. I can sympathise with Ted Nelson whose
Litterary Machines has "a Chapter Zero, several Chapters One, one Chapter Two,
and several Chapters Three", not to mention with Ludwig Wittgenstein whose
Philosophical Investigations have only paragraph numbers for structure.

The notes are in a constant state of flux, sometimes minute by minute,
sometimes decade by decade. Their status varies - some have typos and spelling
errors, and represent thoughts half expressed, wheras others described
resolved issues which have become fundamental architectural decisions in the
conceptual infrastructure of the Web. Again, something in me resists the urge
to draw a line and move things from here into a "done deals" space. I try to
represent accurately the status of a given page in the section above the rule
at the top. Definitive documents, reviewed by W3C members and others, you will
find elsewhere.

Neither have I found it easy to restrict myself to separated technical or
philosophical arguments and somehow this I feel is also important, the
sharpening happening, after all, where the knife meets the stone.

I did draw a line between the really old ones whose dates I couldn't
necessarily even find, and which were too out of date to find themselves
linked into any current discussion. Hence the brown archival section on the
contents page, and the brown archived notes it points to. These are really
only available for completeness of archival, and not suggested reading. The
other remarks here do not apply to them.

For all its (or because of its) lax flexibility, I have personally found this
space a useful one. I have used it to place opionions and explanations which I
have needed to express, and have found it useful to be able to express them
later to others. But also I have found it a personally useful excercie to
review the state of order and disporder from time to time, part of the
intuitive process of making a new step. But that is all personal use and, and
for the hestiations I have just outlined, I have never felt that the whole
collection has been worthy of recommeding as reading as a work in itself.

Tim BL October 1998

* * *

$Id: Preface.html,v 1.5 1999/01/06 18:12:59 timbl Exp $

